Religion is our strength — and weakness. Religion serves as a beacon of light when it helps to make us better human beings. For that, religion has to be rational, and our practise of it, reasonable. Every religion, in its origin, was refreshingly rational. It is when class and group interests hijacked religious beliefs that dogma gained the upper hand.
Look at the religious issues uppermost in our national concerns now — cow vigilantism and strident orthodoxy that pretends the discriminatory custom of triple talaq is a pillar of Islam. Both camps are an embarrassment to their respective religions. Religions arose when people were deficient in their understanding of fundamental issues — the core function of religion is to set people free. But it is here that the merchants of religion play havoc. Blind faith is their passport to anti-people criminality.
Religion turns human beings towards God, so that they are led out of narrow-mindedness. Therefore, any religion which advocates divisive agendas is an insult to God and human beings. We must see through the games religious ventriloquists play.
From a constitutional angle, freedom of choice is basic to the practice of religion. This assumption is spiritually sound — but religious agents who claim protection under Article 25 flout this freedom. No religion respects the freedom of an individual to make free choices with respect to the religion he or she wishes to practice. All religions function on the basis of birth: You are born a Hindu, Muslim, Christian, etc. Christians and Muslims, who are keen to convert, will not allow, much less encourage, their flock to choose any other religion. Article 25 should, according to them, facilitate one-way traffic.
Every religious establishment is keen to focus on religious rituals: No one presents the philosophical core. It is surprising that Hindus don’t react when Hinduism is equated with caste, cows or a Ram mandir. Why don’t Christians feel troubled when church life is, in most respects, a contradiction of Jesus’s teachings? Jesus was passionate about justice and dignity. Where is that to be found in the agenda of the church?
In a multi-religious society like India, it is dangerous to allow religious wheeler-dealers to wreak havoc. Every religious agenda that promotes alienation among citizens should be disallowed. Religions need to be liberated from so-called places of worship. Temples, mosques, churches, gurudwaras and so on have nothing to do with godliness. They are centres of materialism, corruption and greed.